[Docs] Data model (#1374)
wasp-lang/wasp: web/docs/database/backends.md

---

> title: Database Backends

Reviewer: I would add at the end an `Options Reference` section with:
- `db`
- `db.system`
- `db.seeds`
- `db.prisma`
fields explained. 

When you do that, you'll see that you can delete the duplicate explanations above and keep the document simpler.

---

[Entities](/docs/database/entities.md), [Operations](/docs/database/operations.md) and [Automatic CRUD](/docs/database/crud.md) together make a high-level interface for working with your app's data. Still, all that data has to live somewhere, so let's see how Wasp deals with databases.

## Database configuration

> You can tall Wasp which database to use in the `app` declaration's `db` field:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can tell Wasp which database to use in the `app` declaration's `db` field:
```

> ```wasp

Reviewer: I usually added Javascript/Typescript tabs for Wasp files as well to keep ti consistent. Also, the user can toggle and see, oh okay, I should put the `.js` extension even when I'm using Typescript.

app MyApp {
  title: "My app",
  // ...
  db: {
    system: PostgreSQL,
    seeds: [
      import devSeed from "@server/dbSeeds.js"
    ],
    prisma: {
      clientPreviewFeatures: ["extendedWhereUnique"]
    }
  }
}
```

> `app.db` is a dictionary with following fields (all fields are optional):

Reviewer: So this piece would go into the `Options Reference` and here you could talk about the options in general or not at all, just link to the reference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`app.db` is a dictionary with the following fields (all fields are optional):
```

- `system: DbSystem`

  The database system Wasp will use. It can be either `PostgreSQL` or `SQLite`.
  If not defined, or even if whole `db` field is not present, default value is `SQLite`.
  If you add/remove/modify `db` field, run `wasp db migrate-dev` to apply the changes.

- `seeds: [ServerImport]`

  Defines seed functions that you can use via `wasp db seed` to seed your database with initial data.
  Check out [Seeding](#seeding) section for more details.

- `prisma: [PrismaOptions]`

  Additional configuration for Prisma.
  It currently only supports a single field:

> - `clientPreviewFeatures : string`

Reviewer: I would inline this one more step so it's under `prisma`

  Allows you to define [Prisma client preview features](https://www.prisma.io/docs/concepts/components/preview-features/client-preview-features).

### SQLite

Default database is `SQLite`, since it is great for getting started with a new project (needs no configuring), but it can be used only in development - once you want to deploy Wasp to production you will need to switch to `PostgreSQL` and stick with it.

> Check below for more details on how to migrate from SQLite to PostgreSQL.

Reviewer: I would link to the title

### PostgreSQL

When using `PostgreSQL` as your database (`app: { db: { system: PostgreSQL } }`), you will need to make sure you have a postgres database running during development (when running `wasp start` or doing `wasp db ...` commands).

### Using Wasp provided dev database

Wasp provides `wasp start db` command that starts the default dev db for you.

Your Wasp app will automatically connect to it once you have it running via `wasp start db`, no additional configuration is needed. This command relies on Docker being installed on your machine.

### Connecting to an existing database

If instead of using `wasp start db` you would rather spin up your own dev database or connect to some external database, you will need to provide Wasp with `DATABASE_URL` environment variable that Wasp will use to connect to it.

> The easiest way to provide the needed `DATABASE_URL` environment variable is by adding it to the [.env.server](https://wasp-lang.dev/docs/language/features#env) file in the root dir of your Wasp project (if that file doesn't yet exist, create it).

Reviewer: We need to fix the link

> You can also set it per command by doing `DATABASE_URL=<my-db-url> wasp ...` -> this can be useful if you want to run specific `wasp` command on a specific database.

Reviewer: I would avoid using `->` since it makes the docs feel like a draft. Let's use proper interpunction 😄

Example: you could do `DATABASE_URL=<my-db-url> wasp db seed myProdSeed` to seed data for a fresh staging or production database.

> ### Migrating from SQLite to PostgreSQL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Migrating from SQLite to PostgreSQL
```

To run Wasp app in production, you will need to switch from `SQLite` to `PostgreSQL`.

1. Set `app.db.system` to `PostgreSQL`.
2. Delete old migrations, since they are SQLite migrations and can't be used with PostgreSQL: `rm -r migrations/`.

> 3. Run `wasp start db` to start your new db running (or check instructions above if you prefer using your own db). Leave it running, since we need it for the next step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Run `wasp start db` to start your new db running (or check the instructions above if you prefer using your db). Leave it running, since we need it for the next step.
```

4. In a different terminal, run `wasp db migrate-dev` to apply new changes and create new, initial migration.
5. That is it, you are all done!

> ### Seeding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Seeding
```

**Database seeding** is a term for populating database with some initial data.

Seeding is most commonly used for two following scenarios:

> 1.  To put development database into a state convenient for testing / playing with it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  To put the development database into a state convenient for testing / playing with it.
```

2.  To initialize dev/staging/prod database with some essential data needed for it to be useful,
    for example default currencies in a Currency table.

> #### Writing a seed function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Writing a seed function
```

Wasp enables you to define multiple **seed functions** via `app.db.seeds`:

> ```wasp

Reviewer: Typescript/javascript switch

  const user = await createUser(prismaClient, {
    username: "RiuTheDog",
    password: "bark1234",
  });

  await createTask(
    { description: "Chase the cat" },
    { user, entities: { Task: prismaClient.task } }
  );
};

async function createUser(prismaClient, data) {
  const { password, ...newUser } = await prismaClient.user.create({ data });
  return newUser;
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="ts" label="TypeScript">

```ts
import { createTask } from "./actions.js";
import { User } from "@wasp/entities";
import { PrismaClient } from "@prisma/client";

type SanitizedUser = Omit<User, "password">;

export const devSeedSimple = async (prismaClient: PrismaClient) => {
  const user = await createUser(prismaClient, {
    username: "RiuTheDog",
    password: "bark1234",
  });

  await createTask(
    { description: "Chase the cat", isDone: false },
    { user, entities: { Task: prismaClient.task } }
  );
};

async function createUser(
  prismaClient: PrismaClient,
  data: Pick<User, "username" | "password">
): Promise<SanitizedUser> {
  const { password, ...newUser } = await prismaClient.user.create({ data });
  return newUser;
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

> #### Running seed functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Running seed functions
```

---
title: Databases
---

[Entities](/docs/database/entities.md), [Operations](/docs/database/operations.md) and [Automatic CRUD](/docs/database/crud.md) together make a high-level interface for working with your app's data. Still, all that data has to live somewhere, so let's see how Wasp deals with databases.

## Supported Database Backends

Wasp supports multiple database backends. We'll list and explain each one.

### SQLite

> The default database Wasp uses is [`SQLite`](https://www.sqlite.org/index.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default database Wasp uses is [SQLite](https://www.sqlite.org/index.html).
```

> SQLite is a great way for getting started with a new project because it doesn't require any configuration, but Wasp can only use it in development. Once you want to deploy your Wasp app to production, you'll need to switch to `PostgreSQL` and stick with it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SQLite is a great way for getting started with a new project because it doesn't require any configuration, but Wasp can only use it in development. Once you want to deploy your Wasp app to production, you'll need to switch to PostgreSQL and stick with it.
```

Fortunately, migrating from SQLite to PostgreSQL is pretty simple, and we have [a guide](#migrating-from-sqlite-to-postgresql) to help you.

### PostgreSQL

> [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/) is a real production database.

Reviewer: This reads poorly, we should somehow say "this is rock solid battle tested database" without implying that SQLite is not (since it has proven itself recently) .

Something I found online:
> PostgreSQL is the world’s most advanced open source database and the fourth most popular database. In development for more than 20 years, PostgreSQL is managed by a well-organized and highly principled and experienced open source community. It is an object-oriented database that is fully ACID compliant and highly extensible, enabling the community to add new features and capabilities as workload demands evolved.

But maybe more relaxed 🤷

> To use Wasp with PostgreSQL, you'll have to ensure a database instance is running during development. Wasp needs access to your database for commands such as `wasp start` or `wasp db ...` and expects to find a connection string in the `DATABASE_URL` environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use Wasp with PostgreSQL, you'll have to ensure a database instance is running during development. Wasp needs access to your database for commands such as `wasp start` or `wasp db migrate-dev` and expects to find a connection string in the `DATABASE_URL` environment variable.
```

I would be specific

We cover all supported ways of connecting to a database in [the next section](#connecting-to-a-database).

### Migrating from SQLite to PostgreSQL

> To run your Wasp app in production, you'll need to switch from `SQLite` to `PostgreSQL`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run your Wasp app in production, you'll need to switch from SQLite to PostgreSQL.
```

1. Set `app.db.system` to `PostgreSQL`.

> 2. Delete all old migrations, since they are SQLite migrations and can't be used with PostgreSQL: `rm -r migrations/`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Delete all old migrations, since they are SQLite migrations and can't be used with PostgreSQL:

\`\`\`
rm -r migrations/`
\`\`\`
```

> 3. Run `wasp start db` to start your new db running (or check the instructions above if you prefer using your own database). Leave it running, since we need it for the next step.

Reviewer: This reads poorly "start your new db running" and it references some instructions that are no longer above

Author: Crap, forgot to change this chapter.

4. In a different terminal, run `wasp db migrate-dev` to apply the changes and create a new initial migration.
5. That is it, you are all done!

## Connecting to a Database

Assuming you're not using SQLite, Wasp offers two ways of connecting your app to a database instance:

1. A ready-made dev database that requires minimal setup and is great for quick prototyping.
2. A "real" database Wasp can connect to and use in production.

### Using the Dev Database Provided by Wasp

The command `wasp start db` will start a default PostgreSQL dev database for you.

Your Wasp app will automatically connect to it, just keep `wasp start db` running in the background.
Also, make sure that:

> - You have Docker installed and in `PATH`.

Reviewer: Link to Docker installation for connivence

- The port `5432` isn't taken.

### Connecting to an existing database

> If, instead of using `wasp start db`, you'd rather spin up your own dev database (or connect to an external one), you'll need to tell Wasp about it using the `DATABASE_URL` environment variable. Wasp will use the value of `DATABASE_URL` as a connection string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to spin up your own dev database (or connect to an external one), you can tell Wasp about it using the `DATABASE_URL` environment variable. Wasp will use the value of `DATABASE_URL` as a connection string.
```

    For example, populating the Currency table with default currencies, or the Country table with all available countries.

### Writing a Seed Function

You can define as many **seed functions** as you want in an array under the `app.db.seeds` field:

<Tabs groupId="js-ts">
<TabItem value="js" label="JavaScript">

```wasp title=main.wasp
app MyApp {
  // ...
  db: {
    // ...
    seeds: [
      import { devSeedSimple } from "@server/dbSeeds.js",
      import { prodSeed } from "@server/dbSeeds.js"
    ]
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="ts" label="TypeScript">

```wasp title=main.wasp
app MyApp {
  // ...
  db: {
    // ...
    seeds: [
      import { devSeedSimple } from "@server/dbSeeds.js",
      import { prodSeed } from "@server/dbSeeds.js"
    ]
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

Each seed function must be an async function that takes one argument, `prismaClient`, which is a [Prisma Client](https://www.prisma.io/docs/concepts/components/prisma-client/crud) instance used to interact with the database.
This is the same Prisma Client instance that Wasp uses internally and thus includes all of the usual features (e.g., password hashing).

> Since a seed function falls under server-side code, it can import other server-side functions. This is convenient because you'll normally want to seed the database using Actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since a seed function falls under server-side code, it can import other server-side functions. This is convenient because you might want to seed the database using Actions.
```

```wasp title=main.wasp
app MyApp {
  title: "My app",
  // ...
  db: {
    system: PostgreSQL,
    seeds: [
      import devSeed from "@server/dbSeeds.js"
    ],
    prisma: {
      clientPreviewFeatures: ["extendedWhereUnique"]
    }
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="ts" label="TypeScript">

```wasp title=main.wasp
app MyApp {
  title: "My app",
  // ...
  db: {
    system: PostgreSQL,
    seeds: [
      import devSeed from "@server/dbSeeds.js"
    ],
    prisma: {
      clientPreviewFeatures: ["extendedWhereUnique"]
    }
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

`app.db` is a dictionary with the following fields (all fields are optional):

- `system: DbSystem`

  The database system Wasp should use. It can be either `PostgreSQL` or `SQLite`.
  The default value for the field is `SQLite` (this default value also applies if the entire `db` field is left unset).
  Whenever you modify the `db.system` field, make sure to run `wasp db migrate-dev` to apply the changes.

- `seeds: [ServerImport]`

  Defines the seed functions you can use with the `wasp db seed` command to seed your database with initial data.
  Read the [Seeding section](#seeding-the-database) for more details.

> - `prisma: [PrismaOptions]`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `prisma: PrismaOptions`
```
